The Christmas Cottage, a biopic about the artist Thomas Kinkade, famous for the quaint-scary-ugly paintings he sells in shopping malls, is a cinematic portrait of the multimillionaire artist as a young man. Kinkade co-produced the movie, which went straight to DVD when it came out in 2008. In a pivotal scene, the budding “Painter of Light,” home from college, gathers with his mother and younger brother on Christmas morning.
It’s the mid-Seventies in Placerville, California, a small town in the foothills of the Sierra Nevada. The Kinkades are a poor family living in a rundown house. Kinkade’s mother, divorced from his father, has lost her job, and because she is generous to other people in the town—“she loaned people money, she gave people things”—and because she refuses assistance from anyone else, the Kinkades are about to lose what they call “the cottage.” The bank is foreclosing; they’ve only got a few days left to pay.
Young Thom—the grown-up artist spells the short version of his name that way—and his brother have been working hard to raise money for their mother’s overdue mortgage payment, but they haven’t put together enough cash. They can’t save the house, so understandably they don’t have store-bought Christmas gifts to exchange. Instead, Thom (Jared Padalecki, from Gilmore Girls) presents his mother (Marcia Gay Harden) with a picture of their house he’s drawn himself, so she’ll always have something by which to remember what they’re about to lose.
At that moment, in bursts the rest of the film’s cast, made up of character actors from old TV shows—Charlotte Rae from The Facts of Life, the guy who played Bull on Night Court. Are they there to save the day and end the film the way It’s a Wonderful Life ends? Not exactly. They don’t come bearing money to make things right with the bank the way the townspeople do in Capra’s film. They arrive carrying tools and cans of paint. If the Kinkade cottage can’t be saved for the Kinkades, they figure they can at least fix it up so it can be sold for more money than it would have if it remained broken down and leaky. They arrive in the nick of time not to save Maryanne Kinkade but to help her flip her house, and possibly to make sure its appearance doesn’t drive down their own property values. They quickly get to work, and in a jiffy the cottage looks brand new.
But Maryanne is still stuck in the same sinking boat—it just looks nicer. That afternoon, true economic salvation arrives in the form of Peter O’Toole, decrepit but still more powerful than a troupe of yesterday’s sitcom stars. The former Lawrence of Arabia, playing an old, dying painter who inhabits the barn next door, drags himself across the snowy wastes of the Kinkades’ yard carrying an unknown masterpiece. At Christmas dinner, the painter, a renowned artist who has retired to Placerville, unveils what will be his last work on canvas. “You will sell it!” he thunders. “It should bring you enough to keep this cottage forever!”